---
slug: /intro
---

# Introduction

Avalanche is an open-source platform for building decentralized applications (Dapps) in one
interoperable, highly scalable ecosystem. Avalanche is the first ecosystem designed to accommodate
the scale of global finance, with near-instant transaction finality.

Avalanche empowers developers to join a rich ecosystem of blockchains known as Subnets. Subnets
are subsets of the Avalanche Primary Network that validate a set of blockchains. Each Subnet's
failures and performance are isolated from other Subnets in the ecosystem, so increased usage on a
single Subnet doesn't affect other Subnets. Subnets can be permissioned or permission-less, enabling
arbitrary levels of customization for any use-case.

Dapps run on Virtual Machines (VMs), which serve as definitions for blockchain applications.
Solidity developers can build on Avalanche's implementation of the EVM straight out-of-the box, or
build their own custom Virtual Machine (VM) for advanced use cases that require more flexibility
or performance. VMs are supported in multiple languages including Go and Rust, giving developers
unparalleled amounts of flexibility in their implementation.

Avalanche employs a novel consensus algorithm which offers strong safety guarantees, quick finality
times, and high throughput, without compromising decentralization. Avalanche uses proof-of-stake and
is incredibly energy-efficient and sustainable compared to proof-of-work blockchains. Avalanche can
run on easily accessible consumer-grade hardware, and consumes the same amount of energy as 46 US
households. The entire Avalanche network consumes only 0.0005% of the amount of energy consumed by
Bitcoin.

## Building on Avalanche

### Virtual Machines

Blockchains are defined using the Virtual Machine (VM) framework. VMs are language agnostic and give
developers unmatched levels of flexibility and customization in the implementation of their
applications. Developers can choose to build on existing VMs that provide EVM-compatibility, or
build their own custom VMs in the languages and frameworks of their choice.

To learn more about VMs, click [here](virtual-machines.md).

### Subnets

Subnets are Avalanche's solution to scaling, and allow Avalanche to scale to create a massive amount
of interoperable Dapps in its ecosystem.

To learn more about Subnets, click [here](../../subnets/README.md).

## Technology

### Consensus

Avalanche uses a revolutionary consensus algorithm that is scalable, robust, and energy-efficient.
Avalanche consensus offers stronger security guarantees well-above the 51% standard of other
networks.

To learn more about consensus, click [here](avalanche-consensus.md).
